# Vision Transformer for Efficient Chest X-ray and Gastrointestinal Image classification

Abstract:
Medical image analysis is a hot research topic because of its usefulness in different clinical applications, such as early disease diagnosis and treatment. Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have become the de-facto standard in medical image analysis tasks because of their ability to learn complex features from the available datasets, which makes them surpass humans in many image-understanding tasks. In addition to CNNs, transformer architectures also have gained popularity for medical image analysis tasks. However, despite progress in the field, there are still potential areas for improvement. This study uses different CNNs and transformer-based methods with a wide range of data augmentation techniques. We evaluated their performance on three medical image datasets from different modalities. We evaluated and compared the performance of vision transformer model with other state-of-the-art (SOTA) pre-trained CNN networks. For Chest X-ray, our vision transformer model achieved the highest F1 score of 0.9532, recall of 0.9533, Matthews correlation coefficient (MCC) of 0.9259, ROC-AUC score of 0.97, and precision-recall score of 0.920. Similarly, for the Kvasir dataset, we achieved an F1 score of 0.9436, recall of 0.9437, MCC of 0.9360, ROC-AUC score of 0.97, and precision-recall score of 0.898. For the Kvasir-Capsule (a large-scale VCE dataset), our ViT model achieved a weighted F1-score of 0.7156, recall of 0.7182, MCC of 0.3705, ROC-AUC score of 0.57, and precision-recall score of 0.53. We found that our transformer-based models were better or more effective than various CNN models for classifying different anatomical structures, findings, and abnormalities.  Our model showed improvement over the CNN-based approaches and suggests that it could be used as a new benchmarking algorithm for algorithm development. 
